
===== PAGE 1 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg1 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
Ordinance No. 2026-06
Affordable Housing Ordinance
Borough ofLodi, Bergen County
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING CHAPTER 586, ARTICLE I OF THE CODE OF THE
BOROUGH OF LODI, ENTITLED “AFFORDABLE HOUSING ORDINANCE,” TO
ADDRESS THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE FAIR HOUSING ACT (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 ET
SEQ.), AS AMENDED, AND THE UNIFORM HOUSING AFFORDABILITY CONTROLS
(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 ET SEQ.), ASAMENDED, AND TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH
-
THE BOROUGH’S AFFORDABLE HOUSING OBLIGATIONS AND “MUNICIPAL
DEVELOPMENT FEE ORDINANCE”
WHEREAS, the Borough of Lodi filed a resolution of participation in the Affordable Housing
Dispute Resolution Program (the “Program”) and a declaratory judgment action pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et. seq. (the “Fair Housing Act”), entitled “In the Matter of the
Application ofthe Borough of Lodi,” DocketNo. BER-L-537-25 on January 23, 2025; and
WHEREAS, the Borough of Lodi is in the process of entering into a consent order with Fair
Share Housing Center, to carry out Lodi’s affordable housing obligation, whereby the Code
of the Borough of Lodi is to be amended to include provisions addressing Lodi's
constitutional obligation to provide for its fair share oflow- and moderate-income housing, as
directed by the Superior Court and consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-1, et seq., as amended and
supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq., as amended and supplemented, and the New Jersey
Fair Housing Act of 1985, as amended and supplemented; and
WHEREAS, this Ordinance is intended to provide assurances that low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created or rehabilitated with controls on affordability over time and
that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy those units; and
WHEREAS, this Ordinance shall apply except where inconsistent with applicable law; and
WHEREAS, the Borough of Lodi Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan on June 11,2025 pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.;
and
WHEREAS, the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan have been endorsed by the Borough
Council by Resolution Number 25-120 on June 17, 2025; and
WHEREAS, this Ordinance implements and incorporates the adopted and endorsed Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan and addresses the requirements ofN.J.A.C. 5:93-1, et seq., as
amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C.5:80-26.1, et seq. as amended and supplemented, and
the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985, as amended and supplemented;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Lodi
as follows:
SECTION 1. A new Article I of Chapter 586, entitled “Affordable Housing Ordinance,” is hereby
established as follows, to set forth the Borough’s affordable housing regulations in accordance
with the Fair Housing Act (FHA), as amended, and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(UHAC), as amended, for the purpose of implementing and ensuring compliance with the
Borough's affordable housing obligations:
Pagel

===== PAGE 2 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 2of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
A. Introduction & Applicability
;
1. This section ofthe Code sets forth regulations regarding the very low-, low- and moderate-
income housing units in the Borough ofLodi consistent with the provisions outlined in P.L
2024, Chapter 2, including the amended Fair Housing Act (“FHA”) at N.I.S.A. 52:27D-
301 et seq., as well as the Department ofCommunity Affairs, Division of Local Planning
I
Services (“LPS”) at N.J.A.C, 5:99 et seq., statutorily upheld existing regulations of the
i
now-defunct Council on Affordable Housing (“COAH”) at N.J.A.C, 5:93 and 5:97, the
:
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls ((UHAC”) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and as
reflected in the adopted municipal Fourth Round Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
(“HEFSP”).
2.
This Ordinance is intended to ensure that very low-, low- and moderate-income units
(“affordable units”) are created or rehabilitated with controls on affordability over time and
:
that very low-, low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these units pursuant to
statutory requirements, This Ordinance shall apply to all inclusionary developments,
individual affordable units, and 100% affordabie housing developments except where
inconsistent with applicable law. Low-Income Housing Tax Credit financed developments
shall adhere to the provisions set forth below in item 5.c. below.
:
3. The Borough of Lodi Planning Board has adopted a HEFSP pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq. The Fair Share Pian describes the ways the
municipality shall address its fair share ofvery low-, low- and moderate-income housing
as approved by the Superior Court and documented in the Housing Element.
4,
This Ordinance implements and incorporates the relevant provisions of the HEFSP and
addresses the requirements ofP.L 2024, Chapter 2, the FHA, N.J.A.C. 5:99, NJ Supreme
Court upheld COAH regulations at N.J.A.C. 5:93 and 5:97, and UHAC at N.J.A.C. 5:80-
26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
:
5.
Applicability
a, The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all affordable housing developments
and affordable housing units that currently exist and that are proposed to be created
pursuant to the municipality’s most recently adopted HEFSP except that Section H
|
Development Fees shall also apply to all Developments.
|
b.
This Ordinance shall apply to all developments that contain very low-, low- and
moderate-income housing units included in the Municipal HEFSP, including any
unanticipated future developments that will provide very low-, low- and moderate-
income housing units except that Section H Development Fees shall also apply to all
Developments.
c.
Projects receiving federal LowIncome Housing Tax Credit financing and are proposed
for credit shall comply with the low/moderate split and bedroom distribution
requirements, maximum initial rents and sales prices requirements, affirmative fair
marketing requirements of UHAC at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16 and the length of the
affordability controls applicable to such projects shall be not less than a 30-year
compliance period plus a 15-year extended-use period, for a total of not less than 45
yeas.
Page 2

===== PAGE 3 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 3of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
B. Definitions
As used herein the following terms shall have the following meanings:
“Accessory apartments” means a residential dwelling unit that provides complete independent
living facilities with a private entrance for one or more persons, consisting of provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, sanitation, and cooking, including a stove and refrigerator, and is
located within a proposed preexisting primary dwelling, within an existing or proposed
structure that is an accessory to a dwelling on the same lot, constructed in whole or part as an
extension to a proposed or existing primary dwelling, or constructed as a separate detached
structure on the same lot as the existing or proposed primary dwelling. Accessory apartments
are also referred to as “accessory dwelling units”.
“Act” means the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
‘
“Adaptable” means constructed in compliance with the technical design standards of the
bartier free subcode adopted by the Commissioner ofCommunity Affairs pursuant to the “State
Uniform Construction Code Act,” P.L.1975, c. 217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) and in accordance
'
with the provisions ofsection 5 of P.L.2005, c. 350 (C.52:27D-123,15).
“Administrative agent” means the entity approved by the Division responsible for the
administration ofaffordable units, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:99-7, and UHAC at N.JA.C.
i
5:80-26.15.
:
“A ffirmative marketing” means a regional marketing strategy designed to attract buyers and/or
renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16.
“Affirmative Marketing Plan” means the municipally adopted plan of strategies from which
the administrative agent will choose to implement as part of the Affirmative Marketing
requirements.
“Affirmative Marketing Process” or “Program” means the actual undertaking of Affirmative
Marketing activities in furtherance ofeach project with very low- low- and moderate-income
units.
“Affordability assistance” meats the use of funds to render housing units more affordable to
low- and moderate-income households and includes, but is not limited to, down payment
i
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental assistance, assistance with
homeowner’s association or condominium fees and special assessments, common maintenance
expenses, and assistance with emergency repairs and rehabilitation to bring deed-restricted
units up to code, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:99-2.5.
“Affordability average” means an average of the petcentage of regional median income at
|
which restricted units in an affordable development are affordable to low- and moderate-
income households.
\
“Affordable” means, in the case ofan ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.7 and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for
the unit conforms to the standards set forth at N..A.C. 5:80-26.13.
“Affordable housing development” means a development included in a municipality’s housing
element and fair share plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a
Page 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg4of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
municipally sponsored affordable housing project, or a 100 percent affordable development.
This includes developments with affordable units on-site, off-site, or provided as a payment
in-iew ofconstruction only ifsuch a payment-in-lieu option has been previously approved by
the Program or Superior Court as part ofthe HEFSP. Payments in lieu of construction were
invalidated per P.L. 2024, ¢.2.
“Affordable Housing Dispute Resolution Program” or “the Program” refers to the dispute
resolution program established pursuant to N.J.S.A. §2:27D-313.2.
“Affordable Housing Monitoring System” or “AHMS” means the Department’s cloud-based
:
software application, which shall be the central repository for municipalities to use for
reporting detailed information regarding affordable housing developments, affordable housing
unit completions, and the collection and expenditures of funds deposited into the municipal
affordable housing trust fund.
“Affordable Housing Trust Fund” or “AHTF” means that non-lapsing, revolving trust fund
established in DCA pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320 and N.J.A.C. 5:43 to be the repository of
all State funds appropriated for affordable housing purposes. All references to the
“Neighborhood Preservation Nonlapsing Revolving Fund” and “Balanced Housing” mean the
AHTF.
“Affordable unit” means a housing unit proposed or developed pursuant to the Act, including
units created with municipal affordable housing trust funds.
“Age-restricted housing” means a housing unit that is designed to meet the needs of, and is
exclusively for, an age-restricted segment of the population such that: 1. All the residents of
the development where the unit is situated are 62 years or older; 2. At least 80 percent of the
units are occupied by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3. The development has been
designated by the Secretary of HUD as “housing for older persons” as defined in Section
|
807(b)(2) ofthe Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
“Agency” means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency established by
P.L.1983, ¢. 530 (C.55:14K-] et seq.).
“Assisted living residence” means a facility licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health
to provide apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to ensure that assisted living
services ate available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor.
Apartment units must offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a
i
kitchenette, and a lockable door on the unit entrance.
;
“Barrier-free escrow” means the holding offunds collected to adapt affordable unit entrances
to be accessible in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-31
1a et seq. Such funds shall be held in
a municipal affordable housing trust fund pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:99-2.6.
“Builder’s remedy” means court-imposed site-specific relief for a litigant who seeks to build
affordable housing for which the court requires a municipality to utilize zoning techniques,
such as mandatory set-asides or density bonuses, including techniques which provide for the
economic viability of a residential development by including housing that is not for low- and
moderate-income households.
“Certified household” means a household that has been certified by an administrative agent as
a very-low-income household, a low-income household, or a moderate-income household.
Page 4

===== PAGE 5 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 5of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
“CHOICE” means the no-longer-active Choices in Homeownership Incentives for Everyone
Program, as it was authorized by the Agency,
“COAH” or the “Council” means the Council on Affordable Housing established in, but not
of, DCA pursuant to the Act and that was abolished effective March 20, 2024, pursuant to
section 3 at P.L, 2024, c. 2 (N.JLS.A. 52:27D-304.
1).
“Commissioner” means the Commissioner ofthe Department ofCommunity Affairs.
“Compliance certification” means the certification obtained by a municipality pursuant to
section 3 ofP.L.2024, c. 2 (C.52:27D-304.1), that protects the municipality from exclusionary
-
zoning litigation during the current round ofpresent and prospective need and through July 1
of the year the next round begins, which is also known as a “judgment of compliance” or
“judgment ofrepose.” The term “compliance certification” shall include ajudgment ofrepose
granted in an action filed pursuant to section 13 ofP.L.1985, c. 222 (C.52:27D-313).
“Construction” means new construction and additions, but does not include alterations,
reconstruction, renovations, conversion, relocation, or repairs, as those terms are defined in the
State Uniform Construction Code promulgated pursuant to the State Uniform Construction
Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217(N.J,S.A, 52:27D~119 et seq.).
“County-level housing judge” means ajudge appointed pursuant to section 5 at P.L. 2024, c.
4, to resolve disputes over the compliance of municipal fair share affordable housing
obligations and municipal Fair Share plans and housing elements with the Act.
“DCA” and “Department” mean the State ofNew Jersey Department ofCommunity Affairs.
“Deficient housing unit” means a housing unit with health and safety code violations that
require the repair or replacement ofa major system. A major system includes weatherization,
roofing, plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
“Department” means the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
“Developer” means the legal or beneficial owner or owners ofa lot or ofany land proposed to
be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
“Development” means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of
any building or other structure, or ofany mining, excavation, or landfill, and any use or change
in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
|
permission may be required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
|
seq.
|
“Development fee” means money paid by a developer for the improvement of residential and
|
non-residential property as permitted pursuant to NS.A, 52:27D-329.2 and 40:55D-8.1
‘
through 40:55D-8.7 and N.L.A.C. 5:99-3.
:
“Dispute Resolution Program” means the Affordable Housing Dispute Resolution Program,
d
established pursuant to section 5 at P.L. 2024, c. 2 (N..S.A. 52:27D-313.2).
“Division” means the Division of Local Planning Services within the Department of
Community Affairs.
Page $
H

===== PAGE 6 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 6of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
“Emergent opportunity” means a circumstance thathas arisen whereby affordable housing will
be able to be produced through a delivery mechanism not originally contemplated by or
included in a fair share plan that has been the subject of a compliance certification.
“Equalized assessed value” or “EAV” means the assessed value of a property divided by the
current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in which the property is
situated, as determined in accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 at P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.IS.A.
54:1-35a, 54:1-35b,and 54:1-35e). Estimates at the time ofbuilding permit may be obtained
by the tax assessor using construction cost estimates. Final EAV shall be determined at project
completion by the municipal assessor.
:
“Equity share amount” means the product of the price differential and the equity share, with
the equity share being the whole number ofyears that have elapsed since the last non-exempt
sale ofa restricted ownership unit, divided by 100, except that the equity share may not be less
than five percent and may not exceed 30 percent.
“Bxit sale” means the first authorized non-exempt sale of a restricted unit following the end of
the control period, which sale terminates the affordability controls on the unit,
“Exclusionary zoning litigation” means litigation challenging the fair share plan, housing
element, ordinances, or resolutions that implement the fair share plan or housing element ofa
municipality based on alleged noncompliance with the Act or the Mount Laurel doctrine,
which litigation shall include, but shall notbe limited to, litigation seeking a builder’s remedy.
“Extension of expiring controls” means extending the deed restriction period on units where
the controls will expire in the current roundofa housing obligation, so that the total years ofa
deed restriction is at least 60 years.
“Fair share obligation” means the total of the present need and prospective need, including
prior rounds, as determined by the Affordable Housing Dispute Resolution Program, or a court
of competent jurisdiction.
“Fair share plan” means the plan or proposal, with accompanying ordinances and resolutions,
by which a municipality proposes to satisfy its constitutional obligation to create a realistic
opportunity to meet its fair share oflow- and moderate-income housing needs of its region and
which details the affirmative measures the municipality proposes to undertake to achieve its
fair share oflow- and moderate-income housing, as provided in the municipal housing element,
and which addresses the development regulations necessary to implementthe housing element,
including, but not limited to, inclusionary requirements and development fees, and the
elimination of unnecessary housing cost-generating features from the municipal land use
ordinances and regulations.
“EEA” means the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
“Green Building Strategies” means the strategies that minimize the impact ofdevelopment on
the environment, and enhance the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing
durable, low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
“HMFA” or “the Agency” means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.IS.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
Page 6

===== PAGE 7 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg/7of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
“Household income” means a household's gross annual income calculated in a manner
consistent with the determination ofannual income pursuant to section 8 ofthe United States
Housing Act of 1937 (Section 8), not inaccordance with the determination ofgross income for
Federal income tax liability.
“Housing element” means the portion ofa municipality's master plan adopted in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL) atN.J.S.A. 40:55D-28,b(3) and the Act consisting
ofreports, statements proposals, maps, diagrams, and text designed to meet the municipality’s
fair share of its region’s present and prospective housing needs, particularly with regard to
low- and moderate-income housing, which shall include the municipal present and prospective
obligation for affordable housing, determined pursuant to subsection f. at N.LS.A. 52:27D-
304.1.
“Housing region” means a geographic area established pursuant to N.I.S.A, 52:27D-304.2b.
“Inelusionary development” meansa residential housing development in which a substantial
percentage of the housing units are provided for a reasonable income range of low- and
moderate- income households.
“Judgment of compliance” or “judgment for repose” means a determination issued by the
Superior Court approving a municipality’s fair share plan to satisfy its affordable housing
obligation for a particular 10-year round.
“Low-income household” means a household with a household income equal to 50 percent or
less ofthe regional median income.
“Low-income
unit” means
a
restricted
unit
that
is
affordable
to
a low-income
household.
“Major system” means the primary structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, fire protection,
ot occupant service components of a building which include but are not limited to,
weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing
(including septic systems), lead paint abatement or load bearing structural systems.
“Mixed use development” means any development that includes both a non-residential
development component and a
residential development component, and shall include
developments for which: (1)there is
a common developer for both the residential development
component and the non-residential development component, provided that for purposes ofthis
'
definition, multiple persons and entities maybe considered a common developer if there isa
contractual relationship among them obligating each entity to develop at least a portion ofthe
residential or non-residential development, or both, or otherwise to contribute resources to the
development; and (2) the residential and non-residential developments are located on the same
fot or adjoining lots, including, but not limited to, lots separated by a street, a river, or another
geographical feature.
“Moderate-income household” means a household with a household income in excess of 50
percent but less than 80 percent ofthe regional median income.
“Moderate-income unit” means a restricted unit that is affordable to a moderate-income
household.
“MONI” means the no-longer-active Market Oriented Neighborhood Investment Program, as
it was authorized by the Agency.
Page 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 8of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
“Municipal housing liaison” or “MHL” means an appointed municipal employee who is,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:99-6, responsible for oversight and/or administration ofthe affordable
units created within the municipality.
“Municipal affordable housing trust fund” means a separate, interest-bearing account held by
a municipality forthe deposit ofdevelopment fees, payments in lieu ofconstructing affordable
units on sites zoned for affordable housing previously approved prior to March 20, 2024 (per
P.L, 2024, c.2), barrier-free escrow funds, recapture funds, proceeds from the sale ofaffordable
units, rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, enforcement fines,
i
unexpended RCA funds remaining from a completed RCA project, application fees, and any
other funds collected by the municipality in connection with its affordable housing programs,
which shall be used to address municipal low- and moderate-income housing obligations
within the time frames established by the Legislature and this chapter.
“Municipal development fee ordinance” means an ordinance adopted by the governing body
ofa municipality that authorizes the collection ofdevelopment fees.
“New construction” means the creation of a new housing unit under regulation by a code
:
enforcement official regardless of the means by which the unit is created, Newly constructed
units ate evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and may include new
residences created through additions and alterations, adaptive reuse, subdivision, or conversion
of existing space, and moving a structure from one location to another.
“New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund” means an account established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320.
“New Jersey Housing Resource Center” or “Housing Resource Center” means the online
affordable housing listing portal, or its successor, overseenby the Agency pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-321.3 et seq.
“95/5 restriction” means a deed restriction governing a restricted ownership unit that is part of
a housing element that received substantive certification from COAH pursuant to NJ.A.C.
5:93, as it was in effect at the time ofthe receipt of substantive certification, before October 1,
2001, or any other deed restriction governing a restricted ownership unit with a seller
repayment option requiring 95 percent ofthe price differential to be paid to the municipality
or an instrument ofthe municipality at the closing of a sale at market price,
“Non-exempt sale” means any sale or transfer ofownership ofa restricted unit to one’s selfor
to another individual other than the transfer of ownership between spouses or civil union
partners; the transfer of ownership between former spouses or civil union partners ordered as
a result of a judicial decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the
transfer ofownership through an executor’s deed to a class A beneficiary; and the transfer of
ownership by court order.
H
“Nonprofit” means an organization granted nonprofit status in accordance with section
501(c)(3) ofthe Internal Revenue Code.
“Non-residential development” means:
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, any appurtenant
improvements, which is designated to a use group other than a residential use group
Page &

===== PAGE 9 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg9of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
according to the State Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23, promulgated to
effectuate the State uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A, 52:27D-119 et seq., including
any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto;
Hotels, motels, vacation timeshares, and child-care facilities; and
The entirety ofall continuing care facilities within a continuing care retirement community
which is subject to the Continuing Care Retirement Community Regulation and Financial
Disclosure Act, N.J,S.A.52;27D-330 et seq.
“Non-residential development fee” means the fee authorized to be imposed pursuant to
:
N.JS.A. 40:55D-8,1 through 40:55D-8.7.
“Order for repose” means the protection a municipality has from a builder’s remedy lawsuit
for a period of time from the entry of a judgment of compliance by the Superior Court, A
judgment ofcompliance often results in an order for repose.
“Payment in lieu of constructing affordable units” means the prior approval ofthe payment of
funds to the municipality by a developerwhen affordable units are were not produced on a site
zoned for an inclusionary development. The statutory permission for payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units was eliminated per P.L. 2024, c.2.
“Prospective need” means a projection of housing needs based on development and growth
which is reasonably likely to occur in a region or a municipality, as the case may be, asa result
of actual determination ofpublic and private entities, Prospective need shall be determined by
the methodology set forth pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of P.L.2024, c. 2 (C.52:27D-304.2 and
C..52:27D-304.3) for the fourth round and all future rounds ofhousing obligations.
“Qualified Urban Aid Municipality” means a municipality that meets the criteria established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-304.3.c(1).
“Person with a disability” means a person with a physical disability, infirmity, malformation,
or disfigurement which is caused by bodily injury, birth defect, aging, or illness including
epilepsy and other seizure disorders, and which shall include, but not be limited to, any degree
of paralysis, amputation, lack of physical coordination, blindness or visual impairment,
deafness or hearing impairment, the inability to speak or a speech impairment, or physical
reliance on a service animal, wheelchair, or other remedial appliance or device.
“Price differential” means the difference between the controlled sale price of a restricted unit
and the contract price at the exit sale of the unit, determined as of the date of a proposed
contract ofsale for the unit, Ifthere is no proposed contract of sale, the price differential is the
difference between the controlled sale price of a restricted unit and the appraised value ofthe
unit as if it were not subject to UHAC, determined as of the date of the appraisal. If the
controlled sale price exceeds the contract price or, in the absence of a contract price, the
appraised value, the price differential is zero dollars.
“Prior round unit” means a housing unit that addresses a municipality’s fair share obligation
from a round prior to the fourth round of affordable housing obligations, including any unit
that: (1) received substantive certification from COAH; (2) is part ofa third-round settlement
agreement orjudgment ofcompliance approved by a court ofcompetent jurisdiction, inclusive
of units created pursuant to a zoning designation adopted as part of the settlement agreement
orjudgment ofcompliance to create a realistic opportunity for development; (3) is subject to a
Page 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 10of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
grant agreement or other contract witheitherthe State or apolitical subdivision thereofentered
into prior to July 1, 2025, pursuant to either item (1) or (2) above; or (4) otherwise addresses a
municipality’s fair share obligation from a round prior to the fourth round of affordable
housing obligations. A unit created after the enactment of P.L. 2024, c. 2 (N.LS.A. 52:27D-
304.1) on March 20, 2024, is not a prior round unit unless: (1) it is created pursuant to a prior
round development plan or zoning designation that received COAH or court approval on or
before the cutoff date of June 30, 2025, or the date that the municipality adopts the
implementing otdinances and resolutions for the fourth round of affordable housing
obligations, whichever occurs sooner; and (2) its siting and creation are consistent with the
F
form ofthe prior round development plan or zoning designation in effect as ofthe cutoffdate,
without any amendment or variance.
“Program” means the Affordable Housing Dispute Resolution Program, established pursuant
to section 5 ofP.L.2024, c. 2 (C.52:27D-313.2).
“Random selection process” means a lottery process by which currently income-eligible
applicant-households are selected, at random, for placement in affordable housing units such
that no preference is given to one applicant over another, except in the case of a veterans’
preference where such an agreement exists; for purposes of matching household income and
size with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit; or another purpose allowed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.7(k)3. This definition excludes any practices that would allow
affordable housing units to be leased or sold ona first-come, first-served basis.
“RCA administrator” means an appointed municipal employee who isresponsible for oversight
and/or administration of affordable units and associated revenues and expenditures within the
municipality that were funded through regional contribution agreements.
“RCA project plan” means a past application, submitted by a receiving municipality in an
RCA, delineating the manner in which the receiving municipality intended to create or
rehabilitate low- and moderate-income housing.
“Receiving municipality” means, forthepurposes ofan RCA, amunicipality that contractually
agreed to assume a portion of another municipality’s fair share obligation.
“Reconstruction” means any project where the extent and nature of the work is such that the
work area cannot be occupied while the work is in progress and where a new certificate of
occupancy is required before the work area can be reoccupied, pursuant to the Rehabilitation
i
Subcode ofthe uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6. Reconstruction shall not include
|
projects comprised only of floor finish replacement, painting or wallpapering, or the
replacement of equipment or furnishings. Asbestos hazard abatement and lead hazard
abatement projects shall not be classified as reconstruction solely because occupancy of the
work area is not permitted.
|
“Recreational facilities and community centers” means any indoor or outdoor buildings,
spaces, structures, or improvements intended for active or passive recreation, including, but
not Limited to, ballfields, meeting halls, and classrooms, accommodating either organized or
informal activity.
“Regional contribution agreement” or “RCA” means a contractual agreement, pursuant to the
Act, into whichtwo municipalities voluntarily entered into andwas approved by COAH and/or
Page {0

===== PAGE 11 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 11 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
Superior Court prior to July 18, 2008, to transfer a portion of a municipality’s affordable
housing obligation to another municipality within its housing region.
“Regional median income” means the median income by household size for an applicable
housing region, as calculated annually in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3.
“Rehabilitation” means the repair, renovation, alteration, ot reconstruction ofany building or
structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.JWAC, §:23-6.
“Rent” means the gross monthly cost ofa rental unit to the tenant, including the rent paid to
the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities computed in accordance with
E
allowances published by DCA for its Section 8 program. With respect to units in assisted living
residences, rent does not include charges for food and services.
“Residential development fee” means money paid by a developer for the improvement of
residential property as permitted pursuant to NJIS.A. 52:27D-329.2 and N.LA.C, 5:99-3.2,
“Restricted unit” means a dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership unit, that is subject
to the affordability controls ofthis subchapter but does not include a market-rate unit that was
financed pursuant to UHORP, MONI, or CHOICE.
“Spending plan” means a method of allocating funds contained in an affordable housing trust
fund account, which includes, but is not limited to, development fees collected and to be
collected pursuant to an approved municipal development fee ordinance, or pursuant to
NJS.A. 52:27D-329.1 et seq., for the purpose of meeting the housing needs of low- and
moderate-income individuals.
“State Development and Redevelopment Plan” or “State Plan” means the plan prepared
pursuant to sections 1 through 12 ofthe “State Planning Act,” P.L.1985, c. 398 (C.52:18A-196
et al.), designed to represent a balance ofdevelopment and conservation objectives best suited
to meet the needs of the State, and for the purpose of coordinating planning activities and
establishing Statewide planning objectives in the areas of land use, housing, economic
development, transportation, natutal resource conservation, agriculture and farmland retention,
recreation, urban and suburban redevelopment, historic preservation, public facilities and
services, and intergovermmental coordination pursuant to subsection f. ofsection 5 ofP.L.1985,
c. 398 (C.52:18A-200).
“Supportive housing household” means a very low-, low- or moderate-income household
certified as income eligible by an administrative agent in accordance withN.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14,
in which at least one member is an individual who requires supportive services to maintain
housing stability and independent living and who is part of a population identified by federal
or state statute, regulation, or program guidance as eligible for supportive or special needs
housing. Such populations include, but are not limited to: persons with intellectual or
developmental disabilities, persons with serious mental illness, person with head injuries (as
|
defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977), persons with physical disabilities or chronic health
conditions, persons who arehomeless as defined by theU.S. Department ofHousing and Urban
Development at 24 C.F.R. Part 578, survivors of domestic violence, youth aging out of foster
i
care, and other special needs populations recognized under programs administered by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
Program, the McKinney—Vento Act, or the New Jersey Department of Human Services. A
supportive housing household may include family members, unrelated individuals, or live-in
Page II

===== PAGE 12 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 12o0f26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
aides, providedthatthe household meetsthe income eligibility requirements ofthis subchapter,
exceptthat in the case ofunrelated individuals not operating as a family unit, income eligibility
shall be tested on an individual basis rather than in the aggregate, the unit is leased or sold
subject to the affordability controls established herein; and the supportive services available to
the household are designed to promote housing stability, independent living, and community
integration, The determination ofwhether unrelated individuals are operating as a family unit
shall be made based on the applicant’s self-identification of household members on the
affordable housing application.
“Supportive housing sponsoring program” means grant or loan program which provided
i
financial assistance to the development ofthe unit.
“Supportive housing unit” means a restricted rental unit, as defined by N.J.S.A. 34:1B-21.24,
that is affordable to very low-, low- or moderate-income households and is reserved for
occupancy by a supportive housing household. Supportive housing units are also referred to as
permanent supportive housing units.
“Transitional housing” means temporaryhousing that: (1) includes, but isnot limited to, single-
room occupancy housing or shared living and supportive living arrangements; (2) provides
access to on-site or off-site supportive services for very low-income households who have
recently been homeless or lack stable housing; (3) is licensed by the department; and (4) allows
households to remain for a minimum ofsix months.
“Treasurer” means the Treasurer ofthe State ofNew Jersey.
“UHAC” means the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth atNJAC. 5:80-26.
“UHORP” means the Agency’s Urban Homeownership Recovery Program, as it was
authorized by the Agency Board.
“Unit type” means type of dwelling unit with various building standards including but not
limited to single-family detached, single-family attached/townhouse, stacked townhouse
(attached building containing 2 units each with separate entrances), duplex (detached building
containing 2 units each with separate entrances), triplex (3 units each with separate entrance),
quadplex (4 units each with separate entrance), multifamily / flat (2 ormore units with a shared
entrance). Inclusion ofa gatage, or not, shall not define the unit type.
“Very-low-income household” means a household with a household income less than or equal
to 30 percent ofthe regional median income.
“Very-low-income housing” means housing affordable according to the Federal Department
of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized standards for home ownership and
rental costs and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household
income equal to 30 percent or less of the median gross household income for households of
the same size within the housing region in which the housing is located.
“Very-low-income unit” means a restricted unit that is affordable to a very-low-income
household.
“Veteran” means a veteran as defined at N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.10.
“Veterans’ preference” means the agreement between a municipality and a developer or
residential development owner that allows for low- to moderate-income veterans to be given
Page 12

===== PAGE 13 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 13o0f26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
preference for up to 50 percent ofrental units in relevant projects, as provided for at N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311j.
“Weatherization” means building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and craw] space), siding
to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows, replacement storm doors,
replacement windows and replacement doors and is considered a major system for
rehabilitation.
C. Monitoring and Reporting Requirements
1. The municipality shall comply with the following monitoring and reporting requirements
:
regarding the status ofthe implementation ofits court-approved Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan:
a, The municipality shall provide electronic monitoring data with the Department
pursuant to P.L 2024, Chapter 2 and N.JA.C. 5:99 through the Affordable Housing
Monitoring System (AHMS). All monitoring information required to be made public
by the FHA shall be available to the public on the Department’s website at
https://www.nj.gov/dea/dips/hss/MuniStatusReporting.shtml.
b. Onor before February 15 ofeach year, the municipality shall provide annual reporting
of its municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the Department on the
AHMS portal, The reporting shall include an accounting of all municipal Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity, including the sources and amounts offunds collected and
the amounts and purposes for which any funds have been expended, for the previous
year from January Ist to December 31st.
c. On or before February 15 of each year, the annual reporting of the status of all
affordable housing activity shall be provided to the Department on the AHMS portal,
for the previous year from January Ist to December 31st.
D. Affordable Housing Programs
1. Pursuant to amended UHAC regulations at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. and, in addition,
pursuant to P.L. 2024, ¢.2 and specifically to the amended FHA atN.J.S.A. 52:27D-311.m,
“All parties shall be entitled to rely upon regulations on municipal credits, adjustments,
and compliance mechanisms adopted by the Council on Affordable Housing unless those
regulations are contradicted by statute, including but not limited to P.L. 2024, ¢.2, or
binding court decisions,” The following are many of the main provisions of the COAH
regulations ateither N.J.A.C, 5:93 or 5:97 that have been upheld by theNJ Supreme Coutt.
!
Municipalities should consult the cited full COAH regulations when prepating the HEFSP
|
for required documentation, etc. Additional compliance details may also be included in the
specific municipal program manual.
2, Rehabilitation Programs (per N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.2 with updated provisions herein per
i
NLA.C. 5:97-6.2 related to credit towards a municipal present need obligation).
i
a. The Borough will participate in a Bergen County sponsored rehabilitation program.
/
b, The rehabilitation program shall be designed to renovate deficient housing units
occupied or intended to be oceupied by very low-, low- and moderate-income
households such that, after rehabilitation, these units will comply with the New Jersey
Page 13

===== PAGE 14 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 14o0f26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
State Housing Code pursuant toN.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 etseq or the Rehabilitation Subcode,
NLA.C. 5:23-6 to the extent applicable.
c, Both ownership and rental units shall be eligible for rehabilitation funds.
d. All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to very low-, low- and moderate-income
households for a period of 10 years (the control period). For owner-occupied units, the
control period shall be enforced with amortgage anid note and for renter-occupied units
the control period will be enforced with a deed restriction.
e. The municipality shall dedicate aminimum average hard cost of$10,000 for each unit
r
to be rehabilitated through this program and in addition shall dedicate associated
rehabilitation program soft costs such as case management, inspection fees and work
write-ups.
f,
The municipality shall designate, subject to the approval of the Department, one or
more Administrative Agents to administer the rehabilitation program in accordance
with P.L 2024, Chapter 2. The Administrative Agent(s) shall provide rehabilitation
manuals for ownership and rental rehabilitation programs. Manuals shal! be adopted by
resolution of the governing body. Both rehabilitation manuals shall be available for
public inspection in the Office ofthe Municipal Clerk and on the municipal affordable
housing web page.
g. Households determined to be very low-, low-, or moderate-income may participate in
|
arehabilitation program. Rehabilitatedunits shall be exempt from the very low-income
requirements, low/mod split, and bedroom distribution requirements of UHAC, but
shall be administered in accordance with the following:
i.
Jfa unit is vacant at the time of rehabilitation, or if a rehabilitated unit becomes
vacant and is re-rented before the expiration of the affordability controls, the deed
restriction shall require that the unit be rented to a low- or moderate-income
household at an affordable rent.
ii. Ifa rental unit is occupied by a tenant at the time rehabilitation is completed, the
rent charged after rehabilitation shall not exceed the lesser of the tenant’s current
rent or the maximum rent permitted under UHAC.
iii, Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on the standards in UHAC.
iv. At the time of application, applicant households and/or tenant households shall be
subject to income eligibility determinations in accordance with UHAC.
E. Affirmative Marketing.
1. The municipality shall adopt, by resolution, an Affirmative Marketing Plan, subject to
approval ofthe Superior Court, compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended
and supplemented. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall not apply to low and moderate
income units owned or controlled by the Lodi Housing Authority including their Section 8
Program since they have their own Marketing Plan in accordance withFederal Government
Requirements and Guidelines.
2, The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract buyers
and/or renters ofall majority and minority groups, regardless ofrace, creed, color, national
Page 14

===== PAGE 15 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 15o0f26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
origin, ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age, or number of children, to housing units which are being marketed by a
developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing, The Affirmative Marketing Plan is
intended to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to apply for
affordable units in that region. Itis a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward Housing Region 1 and is required to be followed throughout the period of deed
restriction,
3, The Affirmative Marketing Plan provides the following preferences, provided that units
that remain unoccupied after these preferences are exhausted may be offered to households
-
without regard to these preferences.
a. Where the municipality has entered into an agreement with a developer or residential
development owner to provide a preference for very-low-,low-, and moderate-income
veterans who served in time ofwar or other emergency, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-
311, there shall be a preference for veterans for up to 50 percent ofthe restricted rental
units in a particular project.
b. There shall be a regional preference for all households that live and/or work in Housing
Region 1 comprising Bergen, Hudson, Passaic, and Sussex Counties,
c,
Subordinate to the regional preference, there shall be a preference for households that
live and/or work in New Jersey.
d. With respect to existing restricted units undergoing approved rehabilitation for the
purpose ofpreservation or to restricted units newly created to replace existing restricted
units undergoing demolition, a preference for the very-low-, low-, and moderate-
income households that are displaced by the rehabilitation or demolition and
replacement.
4, The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the Affirmative Marketing
Plan and for the proper administration ofthe Affirmative Marketing Process, including the
marketing ofinitial sales and rentals and resales and re-rentals, The Administrative Agent
designated by the municipality shall implement the Affirmative Marketing Process to
ensure the Affirmative Marketing of all affordable units, with the exception of affordable
programs that are exempt from Affirmative Marketing as noted herein.
5.’ The Affirmative Marketing Process shall describe the media to be used in advertising and
publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing
Process, the Administrative Agent shall consider the use of language translations where
appropriate.
6. Applications for affordable housing or notices thereof, ifoffered online, shall be available
in several locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building and/or
;
the County Library for eachcounty withinthe housing region; the municipal administration
:
building and municipal library in the municipality in which the units are located; and the
developer's rental or sales office, The developer shall mail applications to prospective
applicants upon request and shall make applications available through a secure online
website address.
7.
In addition to other Affirmative Marketing strategies, the Administrative Agent shall
provide specific notice of the availability of affordable housing units on the New Jersey
Page 15

===== PAGE 16 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 16 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
Housing Resource Center website. Any other entities, including developers or persons or
companies retained to implement the ‘Affirmative Marketing Process, shall comply with
this paragraph
8. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Process, the Administrative Agent shall
provide a list ofcounseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law.
9. The Affirmative Marketing Process for available affordable units shall begin at least four
;
months (120 days) prior to the expected date ofoccupancy.
F. Municipal Housing Liaison.
1. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by municipal resolution.
2. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the Division, or is in the process of
getting approval, and fully or conditionally meets the requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training as set forth in in N.J.A.C, 5:99-1 et seq.
3. ‘The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and administration of
the affordable housing program, including the following responsibilities, which may not
be contracted out to the Administrative Agent:
a.
Serving as the primary point ofcontact for all inquiries from the Affordable Housing
Dispute Resolution Program, the State, affordable housing providers, administrative
agents and interested households.
b. The oversight of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and affordability controls,
c. When applicable, overseeing and monitoring any contracting Administrative Agent.
d. Overseeing the monitoring of the status of all restricted units listed in the Fair Share
Plan.
e.
Verifying, certifying and providing annual information withinAHMS at such time and
in such form as required by the Division.
f.
Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and administrative agents, as
needed.
g. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability controls, compliance
monitoring, and affirmative marketing as offered or approved by the Division.
h. Overseeing the recording ofa preliminary instrument in the form set forth at N.LA.C.
5:80-26.1 for each affordable housing development.
i.
Coordinating with the Administrative Agent, municipal attorney and municipal
|
Construction Code Official to ensure that permits are not issued unless the document
‘
required in C.8. above has been duly recorded.
j.
Listing on the municipal website contact information for the MHL and Administrative
Agents.
Page 16

===== PAGE 17 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg17of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
,
G. Administrative Agent.
1. All municipalities that have created or will create affordable housing programs and/or
affordable units shall designate or approve, for each project within its HEFSP, an
administrative agent to administer the affordable housing program and/or affordable
housing units in accordance with the requirements of the FHA, NJAC 5:99-1 et seq, and
UHAC.
2. The fees for administrative agents shall be paid as follows:
a. Administrative agent fees related to rental units shall be paid by the developer/owner.
-
b. Administrative agent fees related to initial sale of units shall be paid by the developer.
c. Administrative agent fees related to resales shall be paid by the seller ofthe affordable
home.
d. Administrative agent fees related to ongoing administration and enforcement shall be
paid by the municipality.
3. An Operating Manual for each affordable housing program shall be provided by the
Administrative Agent(s), The Operating Manual(s) shall be available for public inspection
in the Office of the Clerk and in the office(s) of the Administrative Agent(s). Operating
manuals shall be adopted by resolution ofthe Governing Body.
4. Subject to the role ofthe Administrative Agent(s), the duties and responsibilities as are set
forth in N.J.A.C, 5:99-7and which are described in full detail in the Operating Manual,
including those set forth in UHAC, include:
a. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability controls, compliance
monitoring, and affirmative marketing as offered or approved by the Division;
b.
Affirmative marketing:
i.
Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable housing units in
accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the municipality and the
provisions ofN.J,A.C. 5:80-26.16.
ii, Providing counseling, or contracting to provide counseling services, to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualification, rental lease requirements; and landlord/tenant law.
c,
Household certification.
i.
Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with interested
households.
ii, Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation ofgross incomeand
|
assets upon which to base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or
moderate-income unit;
iii, Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination ofeligibility
or non-cligibility within 5 days ofthe determination thereof.
Page 17

===== PAGE 18 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 18 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
|
iv. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a certificate
substantially inthe firm, as applicable, ofeither the ownership or rental certificates
set forth in the Appendices J and K of‘N.JA.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
y. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households living in
the housing region, and eligible applicant households with members working in the
housing region, where the units are located.
vi. Employing a random selection process as provided in the Affirmative Marketing
Plan when referring households for certification to affordable units.
d.
Affordability controls.
i
i.
Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms ofdeed restrictions and mortgages
for the recording at the time ofconveyance of title ofeach restricted unit.
ii. Ensuring that the removal ofthe deed restrictions and cancellation ofthe mortgage
note are effectuated and filed properly with the County Register ofDeeds or County
Clerk’s office after the termination of the affordability controls for each restricted
unit in accordance with UHAC.
iii. Communicating with lenders and the Municipal Housing Liaison regarding
foreclosures.
iv. Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy or certifications
pursuant to N.LA.C. 5:80-26.11.
e,
Records retention.
j.
Cteafing and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control period,
including the recorded deed with restrictions, recorded recapture mortgage, and
note, as appropriate.
ii. Records received, retained, retrieved, or transmitted in furtherance of crediting
affordable units of a municipality constitute public records ofthe municipality as
defined by N.J.S.A. 47:3-16, and are legal property ofthe municipality.
f.
Resales and re-rentals.
i.
Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information
between owners and the Administrative Agent regarding the availability of
testricted units for resale or re-rental.
ii. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information to
very low-, low-, or moderate-income households regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or re-rental.
g. Processing requests from unit owners.
i,
Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted units who wish to
refinance or take out home equity loans during the term of their ownership to
determine that the amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms
ofthis ordinance.
ii. Reviewing and approvingrequests to increase sales pricesfrom owners ofrestricted
units who wish to make capital improvements to the units that would affect the
Page 18

===== PAGE 19 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 19 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
selling price, such authorizations to be limited to those improvements resulting in
additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems.
iii. Notifying the municipality ofan owner’s intent to sell a restricted unit.
iv. Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers,
h.
Enforcement.
i
i.
Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable ownership units for
7
which property tax bills are mailed to absentee owners, and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
ii. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the earliest point
of contact
in
the
processing of the
project
or
development,
written
acknowledgement of the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or in
any other way committed, to any person, other than a household duly certified to
the unit by the Administrative Agent,
iii, Sending annual mailings to all owners ofaffordable dwelling units reminding them
ofthe notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.19(d)4;
iv. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the municipal
Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
y. Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each affordable housing
program administered by the Administrative Agent setting forth procedures for
administering the affordability controls.
i.
The Administrative Agent(s) shall, as delegated by the municipality, have the authority
to take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its/their responsibilities,
herein.
H, Development Fees.
i,
Purpose
a.
This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure of
development fees that are consistent with the amended Fair Housing Act (P.L.2024,
c.2), N.A.C. 5:99, and the Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C.
40:55D-8.1 through 8.7). Fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be used for
the sole purpose of rehabilitating or providing very low-, low- and moderate-income
:
housing in accordance with a Court-approved Spending Plan or rehabilitation of
housing units.
2.
Basic Requirements
a.
This Ordinance establishes the Municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
b. The municipality shall not spend development fees until the court has approved a plan
for spending such fees.
3.
Residential Development Fees
Page 19

===== PAGE 20 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 20 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
a,
Imposed fees
i.
Residential developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of1.5% ofthe equalized assessed value
for residential
development, provided no increased density
is permitted.
Development fees shall also be imposed and collected when an additional dwelling
unit is added to an existing residential structure; in such cases, the fee shall be
calculated based on the increase in the equalized assessed value ofthe property due
to the additional dwelling unit.
ii, When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a “d” variance
7
granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers shall be required to pay a
“bonus” development fee of 6.0% of the equalized assessed value for each
additional unit that may be realized, except that this provision shali not be
applicable to a development that will include affordable housing. If the zoning on
asite has changed during thetwo-yearperiod preceding the filing ofsuch a variance
application, the base density forthe purposes ofcalculating the bonus development
fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
Example: Ifan approval aliows four units to be constructed on a site that was zoned
!
for two units, the fees could equal 1.5% ofthe equalized assessed value on the first
two units; and the specified higher percentage of6% ofthe equalized assessed value
i
for the two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application.
b. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential development
i.
Affordable housing developments, developments where the developer is providing
for the construction of affordable units elsewhere in the municipality, and
developments where the developer has made an eligible payment in lieu of on-site
construction of affordable units, if permitted by ordinance, or by agreement with
the municipality and ifapproved by a municipality prior to the statutory elimination
of payments in-lieu on March 20, 2024 per P.L.2024, c.2, shall be exempt from
development fees.
ii, Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure
undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished and replaced, or is
expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise exempt from the development fee
requirement, The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value ofthe improved structure.
iii. No development fee shall be collected for the demolition and replacement of a
|
residential building resulting froma fire or natural disaster.
'
iv. Developers of one-, two-, three-, and four-family residential dwellings shall be
exempt from paying a development fee.
|
4,
Non-Residential Development Fees
a,
Imposition offees
Page 20

===== PAGE 21 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 21 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
+
Within all zoning districts, non-residential developers, except for developers ofthe
types of development specifically exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% ofthe
equalized assessed value ofthe land and improvements, for all new non-residential
construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
ii. Within all zoning districts, non-residential developers, except for developers ofthe
types of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of
the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing
structures to be used for non-residential purposes.
iii, Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is
;
demolished and replaced. The development fee of2.5% shall be calculated on the
difference between the equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land and
improvements and the equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure;
i.e., land and improvements; and such calculation shall be made at the time a final
certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under this section
results in a negative number, the non-residential development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible
exactions,
ineligible
exactions
and
exemptions
for
non-residential
development
{.
The
non-residential
portion
of a mixed-use
inclusionary
or
market-rate
development shall be subject to a 2.5% development fee, unless otherwise
exempted below.
ii. The 2.5% fee shail not apply to an increase in equalized assessed value resulting
from
alterations,
change in use within
existing
footprint,
reconstruction,
renovations and repairs.
¢.
Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of non-residential
:
development fees in accordance with the exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide
Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), as specified
in
Form
N-RDF
“State
of
New
Jersey
Non-Residential
Development
Cettification/Exemption.”
Any exemption
claimed
by
a
developer
shall be
substantiated by that developer.
d. A developer of a non-residential development exempted from the non-residential
development fee pursuant to the Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act shall
be subject to the fee at such time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and
shall make the payment of the non-residential development fee, in that event, within
three years after that event or after the issuance of the final certificate ofoccupancy of
the non-residential development, whichever is later.
e. Ifa property that was exempted from the collection of a non-residential development
:
fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from property taxation, the owner of the property
;
shall remit the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination
of the property tax exemption. Unpaid non-residential development fees under these
circumstances may be enforceable by the municipality as a lien against the real property
of the owner.
5,
Collection Procedures
Page 21

===== PAGE 22 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 22 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval for a
development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its staff to notify the
construction official responsible for the issuance ofa building permit.
b. For non-residential developments only, the developer shall also be provided with a
copy of Form N-RDF, “State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption,” to be completed by the developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the non-residential developer as per the instructions provided on Form N-
RDF. The tax assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and final
assessments as per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building permit shall notify
the tax assessor of the issuance ofthe first construction permit for a development that
is subject to a development fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the tax assessor shall provide an estimate,
based on the plans filed, ofthe equalized assessed value ofthe development.
e.
The construction official responsible for the issuance ofa final certificate ofoccupancy
shall notify the tax assessor of any and all requests for the scheduling of a final
inspection on property that is subject to a development fee.
f.
Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection, the tax
;
assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated equalized assessed value of
the improvements associated with the development; calculate the development fee; and
thereafter notify the developer ofthe amount of the fee.
g. Should the municipality fail to determine or notify the developer ofthe amount of the
development fee within 10 business days of the request for final inspection, the
developer may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with
the dispute process set forth in Subsection b. of section 37 of P.L.2008, ¢.46 (NLS.A.
40:55D-8.6).
|
h.
Fifty percent (50%) ofthe development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the construction permit. The remainingportion shall be collected at the time ofissuance
of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for paying the
difference between the fee calculated at the time of issuance ofthe construction permit
and that determined at the time ofissuance of certificate ofoccupancy.
6. Appeal ofdevelopment fees
a, A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by filing a challenge
with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by that board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the municipality.
Appeals from a determinationoftheboard may be made to theTax Court in accordance
with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq.,
within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
b. A developer may challenge non-residential development fees imposed by filing a
challenge with the director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a review and
Page 22

===== PAGE 23 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 23 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
determination by the director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the
municipality. Appeals from a determination of the director may be made to the Tax
Court in accordance with the provisions ofthe State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date ofsuch determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund
a. A separate, interest-bearing Municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be
maintained by the chief financial officer of the municipality for the purpose of
i
depositing development fees collected from residential and non-residential developers
and proceeds from the sale ofunits with extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Municipal Affordable Housing
Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
i,
Payments in lieu of on-site construction of an affordable unit, where previously
permitted by ordinance or by agreement with the municipality and if approved by
a municipality prior to the statutory elimination ofpayments in-lieu on March 20,
2024 per P.L.2024, 0.2;
ii. Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in a
townhouse or other multistory attached dwelling unit development accessible;
iii. Rental income from municipally operated units;
iv. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
vy.
Recapture funds;
vi. Proceeds from the sale ofaffordable units; and
vii, Any other funds collected in connection with the municipal affordable housing
:
program including but not limited to interest earned on fund deposits,
c, The municipality shall provide the Division with written authorization, in the form of
a tri-party esctow agreement(s) between the municipality, the Division and the
financial institution in which the municipal affordable housing trust fund has been
established to permit the Division to direct the disbursement ofthe funds as provided
for in N..A.C, 5:99-2,1 et seq.
d. Occurrence of any of the following deficiencies may result in the Division requiring
the forfeiture ofall or a portion ofthe funds in the municipal Affordable Housing Trust
Fund:
i.
Failure to meet deadlines for information required by the Division in its review of
a development fee ordinance;
ii. Failure to commit or expend development fees within four years of the date of
collection in accordance with N.JLA.C. 5:99-5.5;
iii. Failure to comply with the requirements ofthe Non-Residential Development Fee
Act and N.A.C. 5:99-3;
|
Page 23

===== PAGE 24 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 24 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
iv. Failure to submit accurate monitoring reports pursuant to this subchapter within the
time limits imposed by the Act, this chapter, and/or the Division;
v. Expenditure offunds on activities not approved by the Superior Court or otherwise
permitted by law;
vi. Revocation of compliance certification or ajudgment ofcompliance and repose;
vii, Failure of a municipal housing liaison or administrative agent to comply with the
requirements set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:99-6, 7, and 8;
viii.
Other good cause demonstrating that municipal affordable housing funds
j
are not being used for an approved purpose.
e.
All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on eligible affordable
housing purposes approved by the Court.
8.
Use ofFunds
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a Spending Plan approved by Superior
Court, Funds deposited in the municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be used
for any activity approved by the Court to address the fait share obligation and may be
set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to: preservation or purchase ofhousing for the purpose ofmaintaining or implementing
affordability controls; housing rehabilitation; new construction of affordable housing
units and related costs; accessory apartments;
a market-to-affordable program;
conversion of existing non-residential buildings to create new affordable units; green
building strategies designed to be cost-saving and in accordance with accepted national
ot state standards; purchase ofland for affordable housing; improvement of land to be
used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements ofroads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites; financial assistance designed to increase affordability;
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan; and/or any other activity permitted by Superior Court and specified in the
approved Spending Plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the municipality or activities that occurred
prior to the authorization ofa municipality to collect development fees.
c,
Atleast a portion of all development fees collected and interest earned shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to very low-, low- and moderate-income households in
affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. A portion of the
development fees which provide affordability assistance shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to very low-income households.
i.
Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance, security
:
deposit
assistance,
low-interest
loans,
rental
assistance,
assistance
with
|
homeowners
association
or
condominium
fees
and
special
assessments,
infrastructure assistance, and assistance with emergency repairs. The specific
programs to be used for affordability assistance shall be identified and described
within the Spending Plan.
ii. Affordability assistance for very low income households may include producing
very low-income units or buying down the cost of low- or modetate-income units
Page 24
/

===== PAGE 25 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 25of26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to households earning
30% or less ofmedian income.
d. No more than 20% of all affordable housing trust funds, exclusive ofthose collected to
fund an RCA prior to July 17, 2008, shall be expended on administration, including,
but not limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultants’ fees
necessary to develop or implement a new constructionprogram, prepare and implement
a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, administer an Affirmative Marketing Program
and for compliance with the Superior Court and the Program including the costs to the
municipality ofresolving a challenge.
-
9,
Monitoring
a. Onor before February 15 ofeach year, the municipality shall provide annual electronic
data reporting oftrust fund activity for the previous year from January 1st to December
31st through the AHMS Reporting System. This reporting shall include an accounting
of all Municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the sources and
amounts ofall funds collected and the amounts and purposes for which any funds have
been expended. Such reporting shall include an accounting of development fees
collected from residential and non-residential developers, previously eligible payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site (if permitted by ordinance or by
agreement with the municipality prior to the March 20, 2024 statutory elimination per
P.L. 2024, ¢.4), funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free
escrow funds, rental income from municipally-owned affordable housing units,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, interest and any other funds
collected in connection with municipal housing programs, as well as an accounting of
the expenditures ofrevenues and implementation ofthe Spending Plan approved by the
Court.
10, Ongoing Collection of Fees
a. The ability to impose, collect and expend development fees shall continue so long as
the municipality retains authorization from the Court in the form of Compliance
Certification or the good faith effort to obtain it.
b.
If the municipality fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees
prior to the expiration of its Judgment ofCompliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of
!
any or all funds remaining within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund
established pursuant to section 20 ofP.L.1985, ¢.222 (C. 52:27D-320).
11. Emergent Affordable Housing Opportunities. Requests to expend affordable housing trust
|
funds onemergent affordable housing opportunities notincludedin the municipal fair share
|
plan shall be made to the Division and shall be in the form ofa governing body resolution.
Any request shall be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:99-4.1.
Section 3: All ordinances or code provisions or parts thereof inconsistent with this Ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 4: In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Ordinance and the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.), as may be amended
Page 25

===== PAGE 26 =====
BER-L-000537-25
03/11/2026 3:50:02 PM
Pg 26 of 26
Trans ID: LCV2026635163
.
\
and supplemented, UHAC shall govern and preempt the provisions ofthis Ordinance to the extent
ofsuch inconsistency.
Section 5: All sections of Chapter 586 not amended by this Ordinance shall remain in full force
and effect.
Section 6: If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to
be unconstitutional or invalid by any court or competentjurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
|
the remaining portion of this ordinance.
}
Section 7: The amendments set forth herein shall take effect ten (10) days after passage and
t
publication, as required by law.
|
}
ATTEST
BOROUGH OF LODI
|
Rebecca Palddin65 titbipal 0
ScottLuna, Mayor
|
=
-_~eo-—
@\
DECEMBER
SS
1894
hy
eS
Cy
Vv
3
i
“en iitnopuers: FEDYWANWA Vt, 2OW9
sporesMOVIN
1B. 2.0200
[ewonmowco |
| V [Vit
| |
feunemomco TZ
[oumsorusr
so | VW |
| wi
|
[eumsomusr ta
|
t/t
OO
fowcura
TT ZZ
[oermnyuavorwarre [ [| TT TV
[orurvuavonuanmt | | ZT
|
[worm
TT CTW TUT UT
[wvortmn
TT ET
|
{
j
|
i
|
Page 26
|
